In this article we explore how beliefs about system ideals and the achievement of those ideals differentially predict system justification among low- and high-status groups. Our goal was to reconcile how people can promote system ideals such as equal opportunities for all and at the same time recognize that group-based disparities are, in part, due to these unfulfilled ideals. Three studies examined whether people perceived a discrepancy between a system’s ideal goals and its achievement of those goals. Everyone endorsed these goal ideals more than they believed that the goals were being achieved; however, this discrepancy was larger for low-status people. The larger the perceived discrepancy, the more dissatisfied people were with the system and the more likely they were to support hierarchy-attenuating policies. Studies 2 and 3 also examined people’s motivation for endorsing goal ideals. People of all statuses endorsed system ideals to promote an ideal system more than to legitimize the actual system (Study 2); however, high-status people were slightly more likely to endorse system ideals to legitimize the actual system than low-status people (Study 3). In summary, low-status people were more likely than high-status people to recognize discrepancies between system goals and system outcomes, show dissatisfaction with the American system, and prefer policies that would attenuate extant hierarchies.
 

 
The United States is known throughout the world as the “land of opportunity.” One of the main reasons people immigrate to the United States is to live the American dream: acquiring a better education and advancing their economic status through better employment (Hagelskamp, Suárez-Orozco, & Hughes, 2010; Portes & Rumbaut, 2001; Suárez-Orozco & Suárez-Orozco, 2001). However, in reality there are large economic, social, political, educational, and health disparities in American society based on class, race, ethnicity, gender, and sexual orientation. Given these large group-based disparities, it is puzzling that America can maintain its reputation as a country that promises economic opportunities and social and political progress. What is even more perplexing is that people of low-status (e.g., immigrants) believe in these ideals and promises of the American dream despite experiencing economic hardships and discrimination firsthand (Kao & Tienda, 1995; Phalet, Andriessen, & Lens, 2004).

 
Political scientists describe people’s ambivalence about the promise of equality in America. On the one hand, people believe that everyone has a relatively equal chance of getting ahead or improving his or her economic status, but on the other hand, they believe that our political and social systems help perpetuate inequality and that we still have a lot of work to do to eliminate discrimination against marginalized groups (e.g., Bartels, 2008; Hochschild, 1981, 1995, 2006). Several theories attempt to explain this resilience of faith in the American system. Of particular interest are theories that focus on the endorsement and perpetuation of ideologies that rationalize the status quo. For example, the belief that hard work leads to success (meritocracy; Jost & Banaji, 1994; Jost & Hunyady, 2003, 2005; Jost, Pelham, Sheldon, & Sullivan, 2003) can explain why some people enjoy a happy and prosperous life and others struggle and live in squalor. This notion that ideologies and beliefs can be powerful tools to maintain social systems has been referred to, for example, as false consciousness (Marx & Engels, 1846/1978), cultural hegemony (Gramsci, 1971), and legitimizing myths (Sidanius & Pratto, 1999).

 
One prominent theory that explains why people are motivated to maintain these beliefs is system justification theory. System justification theory states that people are motivated by epistemic, existential, and relational needs to legitimize current social, cultural, economic, and political systems and perceive them as fair and just (Jost & Banaji, 1994; Jost, Banaji, & Nosek, 2004; Jost & Thompson, 2000; for similar ideas, see also Kluegel & Smith, 1986; McCoy & Major, 2007; Sidanius, Pratto, & Rabinowitz, 1994; Sidanius, Levin, Federico, & Pratto, 2001). What is paradoxical and provocative about this research is that although high-status members tend to justify the system more than low-status members (e.g., Jost & Thompson, 2000; Sidanius & Pratto, 1999; Wakslak, Jost, Tyler, & Chen, 2007), sometimes low-status members are just as likely, or more likely than, high-status members to endorse system-justifying beliefs (Jost et al., 2003). These findings verify one of the main tenets of system justification theory: that people legitimize the system, even at the expense of personal and/or group interests.

 
Claiming that people of low status justify the status quo is in stark contrast to the numerous examples of low-status individuals and groups subtly and openly opposing and defying dominant systems that disadvantage them, which constitute forms of resistance that seem to challenge the legitimacy of the system (see Kelley, 1994; Lalonde & Silverman, 1994; Miller, Gurin, Gurin, & Malanchuk, 1981; Scott, 1976, 1985; Tausch et al., 2011; Wright, Taylor, & Moghaddam, 1990). Throughout the world and throughout history, low-status groups do at times risk personal freedom and safety to oppose leaders that promote a status quo that keeps them at the bottom. Recently, several powerful and entrenched North African and Middle Eastern governments collapsed as a result of disaffected citizens protesting en masse against status quo governments perceived to be despotic and out of touch with their needs (New York Times, 2011). Even in stable democracies such as the United States, those lower in status push back against a system that marginalizes them. For example, union workers, students, teachers, and the unemployed have occupied Wall Street, and other financial districts across the United States, and expressed their anger toward big business, rising unemployment, home foreclosures, and widespread inequality (New York Times, 2012).

 
There is an evident contradiction between people’s beliefs about what society should achieve and what it actually achieves. Those on the lowest rungs of the social ladder support ideologies that can perpetuate the often imbalanced status quo that exists in America, while simultaneously be dissatisfied with how American systems lead to these unequal outcomes. These inconsistencies suggest that there might be more to the story than low-status people endorsing these beliefs as a means to legitimize current inequality. Perhaps there is a rational basis for believing in these normative ideologies that is rooted in different motives than legitimizing the system (see Laurin, Fitzsimons, & Kay, 2011). This article investigates the complexities of people’s perceptions of society and system legitimacy and provides an additional explanation for why people endorse these ideological beliefs. In so doing, we hope to bridge the seeming contradiction between low-status people’s endorsement of positive American ideologies and their dissatisfaction with the American system. To better understand these inconsistent patterns, we must first understand the definition and source of legitimacy, the function of ideology, and its divergence with support for the status quo.

 
	 
The Meaning and Functions of Ideology
 
Definitions of the term ideology focus on the shared beliefs about prescriptive and descriptive social arrangements. For example, Jost, Federico, and Napier (2009; see also Denzau & North, 2000; Erikson & Tedin, 2003) defined ideology as People use ideology (as defined above) to explain and make sense of society’s outcomes (Feldman, 1988; Feldman & Steenbergen, 2001; Goren, 2004; Jost, Glaser, Kruglanski, & Sulloway, 2003a, 2003b), as well as to describe how society should be structured and operate in the future (Kay et al., 2009). Although many agree that ideology represents core beliefs that can help define one’s values regarding a system and establish the legitimacy of a system, social scientists have been criticized for focusing on the “actual social relations rather than ideal ones” (Beetham, 1991, p. 6). Perhaps emphasizing only one function of ideology (i.e., to legitimize inequality) has led to an oversimplified story about why people endorse these beliefs and an inability to “understand the legitimacy of the modern state, or distinguish where it is, from where it is not, legitimate” (Beetham, 1991, p. 6).

 
an endeavor to describe or interpret the world as it is—by making assertions or assumptions about human nature, historical events, present realities, and future possibilities—and to envision the world as it should be, specifying acceptable means of attaining social, economic, and political ideals. (p. 309)
 
	 
Defining Legitimacy: Congruence of Prescriptive and Descriptive Ideological Beliefs
 
Baba loved the idea of America. It was living in America that gave him an ulcer. - —Khaled Hosseini, The Kite Runner
 
There are two types of beliefs that must be considered simultaneously to know whether people legitimize their systems (Beetham, 1991; Habermas, 1979; Moore, 1978). Prescriptive beliefs refer to the acceptability of certain ideals being pursued by a system, and descriptive beliefs refer to the extent that people perceive current outcomes as reflecting the actual achievement or attainment of these ideals (see also Major, Kaiser, O’Brien, & McCoy, 2007; Son Hing et al., 2011). In other words, prescriptive beliefs represent the abstract values that citizens of a society want to strive for and achieve or how they believe society should work (e.g., hard work should lead to success). Descriptive beliefs refer to the extent to which these values are perceived as actually reflecting society and whether society actually works as intended (e.g., hard work does lead to success). As the quote above implies, prescriptive and descriptive beliefs about a system are often independent, if not at odds.

 
We suggest that only to the extent that there is a correspondence between prescriptive and descriptive beliefs is there evidence of legitimacy. Zelditch (2001) asserted that “belief in something is different from using that belief to justify that something else is ‘right’” (Zelditch, 2001, p. 48). People may agree with how a system should operate but not necessarily agree that a system is operating as it should or is producing fair outcomes (see Son Hing et al., 2011) When a group goal is not achieved, this may lead to a legitimacy deficit (Beetham, 1991) or to the delegitimization of a system (Kelman, 2001; Linz, 1978). Thus, people might agree with a certain ideology because it describes how they think the system should operate, but once they see that the current system is not working the way it should, they may perceive injustice and resist the system (Moore, 1978; Scott, 1976, 1985) or possibly devalue the ideology (see Levy, Freitas, Mendoza-Denton, & Kugelmass, 2006). For example, people may endorse a criminal justice system that, in the abstract, protects all residents equally while simultaneously be dissatisfied with the reality that in our criminal justice system, people of color face systematic discrimination. The degree to which these beliefs are congruent may influence attitudes and behaviors quite differently—leading a populace into complacency or toward revolution (see Taylor & McKirnan, 1984).

 
There is some research that examines the degree to which people’s prescriptive and descriptive beliefs match. This evidence indicates that when motivated to justify a system (due to system dependence, system inescapability, or system threat), people are more likely to perceive the current state of affairs as more ideal (i.e., they “injunctify” the system) than those who are less motivated (Kay et al., 2009). However, examining the mean ratings of system ideals showed that, across the board, participants favored equal over unequal systems regardless of their motivation or the way that the system was initially framed. This pattern suggests that although a system justification motive may influence evaluations of system legitimacy, people’s perception of ideal systems are driven more by desires for equality than by the (often unequal) status quo. This conclusion was especially the case when the participants were members of the group that was disadvantaged by system inequality (Kay et al., 2009, Studies 3 and 4; see also Jost & Kay, 2005, Studies 1 and 2; Sidanius & Pratto, 1999). In short, injuctification of unequal systems might be less likely for those low than high in status. Thus, in the current article, we also examine whether the correspondence between prescriptive and descriptive beliefs is moderated by group status (e.g., income and socioeconomic status).

 
	 
Using Status to Predict the Different Functions of Ideology
 
Although most Americans accept prescriptive beliefs about equality, meritocracy, and democracy, they may differ widely in their descriptive beliefs. Because prescriptive principles may not, or do not, come to fruition for members of low-status groups, these people in particular might not believe in the descriptive manifestations of these ideologies:

 
It is clear that a radical critique of existing arrangements may arise in virtually any subordinate class that takes the dominant ideology to heart and, at the same time, penetrates in daily life the realities that betray or ignore the implicit promises of that ideology. (Scott, 1985, p. 339)
 
If people of high and low status differ in their descriptive beliefs, then they may have different motivations for endorsing prescriptive beliefs. To the extent that people perceive system outcomes as reflecting ideological goals, they may use prescriptive ideological beliefs as a means to legitimize the status quo. For example, people who believe that hard work does lead to success might be more likely to use the prescriptive ideology of meritocracy to rationalize why some people are successful and others are not.

 
Conversely, to the extent that people recognize that outcomes are not conforming to normative ideals, they may be motivated to reinforce prescriptive beliefs, not because they want to legitimize current inequality, but because they hope that by pushing for higher ideological standards, one day those goals can be achieved. In other words, they may strategically use prescriptive beliefs in an effort to change the status quo—which suggests a different utility of ideology for those in different social strata. This distinction can only be revealed when one considers both prescriptive and descriptive beliefs. Thus, low-status people may be less likely to endorse descriptive beliefs of ideologies than high-status people (see Crocker & Major, 1989; Fox & Ferri, 1992); however, low-status people may still endorse prescriptive beliefs (perhaps even more strongly than high-status people) in an effort to bring the system more in line with these ideals.

 
Not only can people’s perceptions about legitimacy (as defined by the congruence between prescriptive and descriptive beliefs) determine the function of ideology, but they can also determine people’s satisfaction with different systems and influence whether people support policies aimed at achieving the abstract ideological goals of a system. If people believe that a goal has already been achieved (i.e., descriptive beliefs), then they will be more satisfied with the system and less likely to support policies that promote changes to the system (Hochschild, 2006).

 
	 
Overview of Studies
 
The purpose of Studies 1–3 was to examine people’s perceptions of how society actually operates (descriptive beliefs) and whether these views are congruent with or divergent from their views of what should be occurring in society (prescriptive beliefs). We are particularly interested in investigating whether people’s status influences these perceptions. We predicted that people of all statuses would endorse the abstract goals of ideologies (i.e., prescriptive beliefs) but would be less likely to endorse beliefs that this is how society actually functions (i.e., descriptive beliefs), resulting in a main effect of beliefs. We also expected that this discrepancy between prescriptive and descriptive beliefs would be larger for low-status individuals than high-status individuals, resulting in an interaction between status and beliefs.

 
We expected that status would independently predict satisfaction with the system (arguably a more direct measure of system justification) and support for policies that maintain existing hierarchies. However, we predicted that the discrepancy between prescriptive and descriptive beliefs would be the strongest predictor of dissatisfaction with the system and support for policies designed to change the system (Studies 1–3). We expected that perceived discrepancy would function similarly regardless of status, and therefore did not predict that these would interact to predict satisfaction and policy preferences.

 
We also expected that high- and low-status participants would endorse prescriptive ideological beliefs for different reasons. Those of high status would be more likely to endorse the prescriptive beliefs to perpetuate the existing system. Conversely, those of low status would endorse these beliefs in an effort to transform the system (Studies 2 and 3). Similarly, we expected that those who perceive less of a discrepancy between prescriptive and descriptive beliefs would endorse prescriptive beliefs to perpetuate the existing system, but those that perceive more of a discrepancy would endorse prescriptive ideologies in an effort to transform the system.

 
	 
Study 1
 
Study 1 examined the extent to which people of high and low status endorse the abstract goals of American ideologies (prescriptive beliefs) and whether or not they believed that these goals were being attained (descriptive beliefs). Participants rated the extent to which they endorse the prescriptive and descriptive beliefs of equality, meritocracy, and democracy. We selected ideologies that have been used in prior work on system justification and legitimizing myths: equality (Jost & Thompson, 2000; Sidanius & Pratto, 1999), meritocracy (sometimes referred to as Protestant work ethic; Jost & Hunyady, 2003; Quinn & Crocker, 1999), and democracy (Manwell, 2010). We predicted that everyone would perceive a discrepancy between prescriptive and descriptive ideological beliefs (a main effect of beliefs), but that this pattern would be more pronounced for low-status than high-status individuals (a belief by status interaction). Specifically, low-status members should be just as, or more likely than, high-status members to endorse the prescriptive ideological beliefs; however, low-status members should be less likely than high-status members to endorse the descriptive beliefs.

 
Participants also rated the extent to which they were satisfied with America and would support federal spending to better the conditions for low-status groups. We expected that satisfaction would be lower and support for hierarchy-attenuating policies would be higher among low-status members and for those who perceived a larger discrepancy between prescriptive and descriptive beliefs.