Contrary to those of adults and adolescents  children s value structures and value preferences have rarely been investigated. This paper bridges this gap by building on Schwartz s  1992  value theory. We present two studies  one in which children from Germany  Portugal  and Chile  aged 10 to 12 years  completed the Portrait Values Questionnaire  Schwartz et al.  2001   and one in which children from Germany and France  aged 7 to 12 years  completed the Picture Based Value Survey for Children  D ring  Blauensteiner  Aryus  Dr gekamp    Bilsky  2010 . Theory based multidimensional scaling analyses revealed differentiated value structures in both studies. Findings on children s value preferences converged with evidence from adult samples  Schwartz   Bardi  2001 . The results are discussed in light of the present state of knowledge and consequences for future research.      Empirical research on human values has grown rapidly over the past few decades  e.g.  Hofstede  1980  Inglehart  1977  Rokeach  1973  Schwartz  1992 . One of the most fruitful theories on the content and structure of human values   one that has also proved to be a conceptually and empirically appropriate and sound approach for cross cultural investigations   was developed by Schwartz  1992 . Schwartz conceives values as transsituational concepts or beliefs about desirable goals that vary in importance and serve as guiding principles in people s lives. With respect to their content  values can be distinguished on the basis of the motivational goals they express. Schwartz derives ten motivationally distinct basic values  see Table 1  second column .   Graphic Table 1   These basic values are dynamically related and show a circular structure  which results because the behavioral implications of individual values are either compatible or incompatible with each other. This suggests that the closer any two basic values are located around the circle  the more compatible they are. The ten basic values can be aggregated so as to form four higher order values  HOV . These HOVs represent opposing poles of two roughly orthogonal dimensions  self enhancement versus self transcendence and openness to change versus conservation. The assignment of basic to HOVs is shown in Table 1  see Schwartz  2005 .    The universality of this structure was confirmed in hundreds of studies with samples from all over the world  e.g.  Bilsky  Janik    Schwartz  2011  Schwartz  1994  2006  2007  Schwartz   Sagiv  1995 . In addition  research revealed universal patterns for value preferences. For example  a pancultural value hierarchy appears to lie hidden behind the obvious differences between cultures  All over the world  people consider values of benevolence and universalism important  but values of power unimportant  Schwartz  2006  2007  Schwartz   Bardi  2001 . Furthermore  women tend to find values of self transcendence and conservation more important than men  whereas men tend to find values of self enhancement and openness to change more important than women  Schwartz   Rubel  2005 . It seems reasonable to assume that the ground for these and other cross cultural patterns is laid in early childhood.    Surprisingly  however  only a few studies have addressed values in adolescence  e.g.  Barni   Knafo  2012  Daniel et al.  2012  Knafo   Schwartz  2003   only a handful of studies have reported findings on values in late childhood  i.e.  ca. 10 to 12 years  Boehnke   Welzel  2006  Bubeck   Bilsky  2004  D ring  2010  Knafo   Spinath  2011   and there is hardly any research at all on values of children under 10 years of age  Cieciuch  Harasimczuk    D ring  2010  D ring  Blauensteiner  Aryus  Dr gekamp    Bilsky  2010 . Although evidence on the content and structure of human values at this early age is scarce so far  the existing findings encourage researchers to further follow this path  Bubeck and Bilsky  2004   Cieciuch et al.  2010   D ring  2010   and D ring et al.  2010  found highly differentiated value structures in childhood  which indicate that children basically structure values the same way adults do.    Even though this finding is intriguing in view of traditional values research  it can be embedded in recent developmental theories  e.g.  Eder   Mangelsdorf  1997  Thompson  Meyer    McGinley  2006 . Thompson et al.  2006   for instance  point to a reconceptualization of the child s role in the process of value transmission  While traditional approaches portrayed the child in line with Piaget and Kohlberg as a preconventional and egocentric thinker who reacts to the incentives and sanctions provided by adults  recent approaches portray the child as an  intuitive moralist   Thompson et al.  2006  p. 290  who is sensitive to standards and who develops a differentiated conception of desires  intentions  and rules. Thus  the child s own conscious representation of values gradually moved to the focus of interest. Likewise  it is often stated that children s ability to provide meaningful information by themselves has been historically underestimated  e.g.  Morris  Robinson    Eisenberg  2006 . Numerous recent studies revealed surprisingly differentiated structures within children s self concepts after researchers succeeded in developing suitable procedures for obtaining information directly from the child. While studying various aspects of children s self concept  researchers discovered clear structures in early childhood which progressively differentiate as children grow older  see Eder  1990  for pioneering work in this respect  for an overview  see Measelle  John  Ablow  Cowan    Cowan  2005 . However  empirical evidence of how children conceive values is still widely missing.    This contrasts with the fact that children s values are a highly prominent issue in politics and education worldwide 1. A better understanding of how children structure values  i.e.  how they understand and attach meaning to individual values in relation to one another  and of which values children find important  i.e.  children s value preferences  will help us to build a solid basis for both scientists and practitioners in this area. We believe that the child s own report is of particular importance for understanding his her value preferences and value structures. It reveals information not otherwise accessible that cannot be replaced by any other source such as the primary caregiver  see Morris et al.  2006 .    In this article  we assess children s values through self report. We replicate and validate the findings from previous studies and expand their cultural scope. The most critical issue so far concerned the question about how researchers can successfully obtain data from children. Findings by Bubeck and Bilsky  2004  as well as by D ring  2010  indicate that the most widely used questionnaire based on Schwartz s framework  the Portrait Values Questionnaire  PVQ 21  Schwartz et al.  2001   can be successfully completed by children over the age of 10 if an adult instructor provides continuous assistance. By the age of 10 years  however  a critical threshold seems to have been reached  see D ring  2010 . In order to follow the development and shaping of values through childhood  D ring et al.  2010  introduced a new questionnaire for elementary school aged children that was specifically suited to children s literary and life context  the Picture Based Value Survey for Children  PBVS C .    Focusing in particular on the critical age of 10 years  we present findings on value structures and value preferences from different cultures. In Study 1  10  to 12 year old children from Germany  Portugal  and Chile completed Schwartz et al. s PVQ. Germany  Portugal  and Chile represent culturally diverse life contexts  which  however  do not differ enormously with respect to the cultural values transmitted from one generation to the next  Schwartz  2006 . In Study 2  7  to 12 year old children from Germany and France completed D ring et al. s PBVS C. The cultural life contexts in Germany and France differ somewhat  e.g.  France is more oriented toward intellectual autonomy  whereas Germany is more oriented toward egalitarianism  Schwartz  2006 . However  by and large  they are not very different in their underlying cultural value orientations.    Back to Top   Study 1  Assessment of Children s Values with the PVQ   Our first study was to serve as a comprehensive replication of the study conducted by Bubeck and Bilsky  2004   who were among the first to explore value structures in adolescence. They analyzed data obtained with an earlier version of Schwartz s PVQ  the PVQ 29  Schwartz   from 1 555 German subjects aged 10 to 17 years. They found that value structures in the youngest subsample  10 12 years  were almost as differentiated as those in the oldest subsample  15 17 years . In order to substantiate this finding  we collected further data from 10  to 12 year old German children using the PVQ 21  the most recent and most widely employed version  e.g.  see http   www.europeansocialsurvey.org   and complemented this data with data from Portugal and Chile.2 We expected to obtain similar findings on value structures and value preferences in these three countries due to shared European  Germany and Portugal  and Christian roots.    Back to Top   Method   Back to Top   Samples   All samples cover a wide range of children s socioeconomic and educational backgrounds  although they are not strictly representative. The data were collected in schools  the survey was administered in class  with a trained researcher giving the children the instructions.    Back to Top   German Sample   The data were collected in both rural and urban areas of two federal states of Germany  North Rhine Westphalia and Baden Wuerttemberg. There were 1 096 participants  schoolchildren from the four different types of secondary school in Germany  comprehensive school  grammar school  and two types of secondary school . The participants were aged 10 to 12  M   11.1  SD   0.72   the sample was almost evenly split between males  n   561  and females  n   535 .    Back to Top   Portuguese Sample   The data were collected at one school in Lisbon  two schools near Lisbon  and at another school in Lamego  a small city about 300 km to the north of Lisbon. One of the schools near Lisbon was private  attended by 281 of the participants   all the others were public schools. Altogether  456 Portuguese students  247 boys and 209 girls  aged 10 to 12  M   11.0  SD   0.74  participated in this study.    Back to Top   Chilean Sample   The data were collected in two large Chilean cities  Los Angeles  n   226  with about 100 000 inhabitants and Puerto Montt  n   424  with about 150 000 inhabitants. A group of 650 Chilean schoolchildren  312 boys and 338 girls  aged 10 to 12  M   11.0  SD   0.78  participated in our study. About half of the participants attended public schools  n   335  and the other half private schools  n   315 .    Back to Top   Value Survey   A short form of Schwartz s Portrait Values Questionnaire  Schwartz et al.  2001  was used in Study 1. This form comprises vignettes with verbal portraits of 21 different people  PVQ 21 . Each of them describes a person s goals as specified by Schwartz s theory  see Table 1 . The following example is indicative of self direction   Thinking up new ideas and being creative is important to her him. S he likes to do things in her his own original way.  Answers to the question  How much is this person like you   are to be given for each vignette on a 6 point scale  1   very much like me and 6   not at all like me .    Back to Top   Data Analysis   Back to Top   Structural Analyses   Pearson correlation coefficient matrices from the responses to the 21 PVQ items provided the basis for our structural analyses of values  which were conducted using ordinal multidimensional scaling  MDS . MDS has been a central tool of psychological research on value structure in the past  and it is usually used in an exploratory way. Contrary to this practice  our MDS approach uses a starting configuration derived from theoretical considerations. This reduces the danger of local minima and facilitates a theoretically grounded interpretation of results  Borg   Groenen  2005  Borg   Staufenbiel  2007 .    Recent analyses of value data from the European Social Survey showed that Schwartz s original and his revised model of value structures  Schwartz  1992  pp. 14 and 45  respectively  can be considered theoretically equivalent alternatives supported by empirical research  Bilsky   Janik  2010b  Bilsky et al.  2011 3. Therefore  we chose the more parsimonious original model with ten adjacent value sectors as the starting configuration for the following analyses  as was done for previous analyses of value structures at an early age  see D ring  2010  D ring et al.  2010 . This was accomplished by specifying trigonometrically the prototypical location of each basic value by corresponding coordinates in two dimensional space  Table 1  Columns 4 6  see Bilsky et al.  2008  Bilsky   Janik  2010a . The starting configuration for each of the value items of Schwartz s Portrait Values Questionnaire results from these coordinates  Items that are indicators of the same basic value are represented by identical coordinates. Ordinal multidimensional scaling was performed using SPSS PROXSCAL and SYSTAT 12.