Assessing Difficulties in Career Decision Making Among Swiss Adolescents with the German My Vocational Situation Scale Hirschi  Andreas1  Herrmann  Anne2 Author Information 1University of Lausanne  Institute of Psychology  Switzerland 2Leuphana University of L neburg  Department of Experimental Business Psychology  Germany Andreas Hirschi University of Lausanne Institute of Psychology Quartier UNIL Dorigny B timent Geopolis 1015 Lausanne Switzerland andreas.hirschi unil.ch   Abstract   Assessing problems in career decision making among adolescents is important for career guidance and research. The present study is the first to investigate among Swiss adolescents the factor structure and convergent validity in relation to personality of the German language adaptation of the My Vocational Situation Scale. Two preliminary studies  N   217  suggested that using a 5 point Likert scale response format would increase scale reliability. The confirmatory factor analyses in the main study with two cohorts  n   341  eighth grade  n   303  eleventh grade  confirmed that four main factors  which assess problems with identity  decision making  information  and perceived barriers  underlie the data. The barriers factor was differentiated into aspired vocation and personal situation. Construct validity was supported by significant relationships between favorable personality characteristics  emotional stability  extraversion  agreeableness  conscientiousness  generalized self efficacy  and internal locus of control  and fewer problems. The results suggest that the vocational identity and barriers scales can be fruitfully applied to research on and the practice of career counseling with adolescents.      Adolescence is an important time of vocational preparation for future career development  Super  1990 . One core component of career preparation during adolescence is the achievement of a well developed career choice readiness  which can be defined as the readiness and ability of a person to successfully engage in the career decision making process and reach a well founded career decision  Phillips   Blustein  1994 . Several international studies have indicated that having a high career choice readiness and choice clarity in adolescence is related to various components of well being and adaptation  Creed  Prideaux    Patton  2005  Skorikov   Vondracek  2007 . The assessment and prevention of career decision making difficulties is therefore a major focus in career development research and counseling practice  Brown   Rector  2008 . However  there is a shortage of empirically evaluated and supported German language measurement scales in this area for adolescents.    In this context  the goals of the present study are  1  to investigate for the first time the applicability of the German language version of one the world s most frequently applied scales for the assessment of career decision making difficulties  the My Vocational Situation Scale  MVS  Holland  Daiger    Power  1980   with Swiss adolescents  and  2  to examine the extent to which individual differences in the hereby assessed difficulties are related to more fundamental personality dispositions of adolescents.    Back to Top   The My Vocational Situation Scale   Assessing problems in career decision making has traditionally been an important component of career counseling and vocational guidance to identify specific targets for interventions in order to promote career development. The My Vocational Situation Scale  MVS  Holland  Daiger et al.  1980  is one of the world s most frequently applied measures for assessing difficulties in career decision making. It assesses career related problems in three areas   1  problems with vocational identity   2  lack of career information or training  and  3  environmental or personal barriers in career decision making  Holland  Gottfredson    Power  1980 . Since its publication  the scale has been extensively evaluated and applied in career research and counseling practice in areas such as assessing the degree of readiness of a client in order to assign the appropriate kind and level of treatment  e.g.  Sampson  Peterson  Reardon    Lenz  2000   as an outcome measure when evaluating the effectiveness of career interventions  Whiston  Sexton    Lasoff  1998   or for assessing theoretically important constructs in career development research  e.g.  Multon  Wood  Heppner    Gysbers  2007 . Apart from these applications as a quantitative measurement scale  the MVS can also be applied in counseling practice as a qualitative treatment tool in that the meaning of answers to individual items can be discussed between counselor and client  Holland  Johnston    Asama  1993 .    J rin  Stoll  Bergmann  and Eder  2004  published a German language adaptation of the MVS. The scale measures the same three areas of career decision making problems as the original version with 18 items stating possible problems in career decision making  e.g.   I am not sure about my strengths and weaknesses  interests  and abilities  . Answers are provided on a three point scale with scale values 0  not true   1  partially true   and 2  true   higher values indicating that more problems were reported. Originally  the 18 item vocational identity subscale was directly adapted from the original English version  but was reduced to 10 items based on the results of scale analyses in the process of scale development research with secondary  high school and university students  and adults. The items for the other two subscales  information  two items  and barriers  six items  were not directly derived from the original scale but generated by J rin and colleagues based on considerations about possible problems in the career decision making process in these two areas. J rin Fux  2006  evaluated the adapted scale with two samples consisting of high school students  university students  and adults. Based on exploratory factor analyses with these study participants  two reliable factors were identified for the scale  one factor tapping into problems related to personal aspects  i.e.  identity and information  and one factor tapping into problems related to problems in the environment  i.e.  barriers . J rin Fux also reported some findings supporting the construct validity of the scale by showing  for example  significant relationships between reported problems and a smaller range of considered career alternatives  more need for counseling  and lower interest profile differentiation.    Two potentially important areas of application of the German language scale are research and counseling practice with adolescents. In the German speaking countries of Switzerland  Germany  and Austria  there is a strong focus in the educational system on vocational education and training  VET   Heinz  Kelle  Wirtzel    Zinn  1998  Hirschi  2010  Seifert   Eder  1991 . For example  in Switzerland  about two thirds of all students pursue VET after finishing compulsory school at the end of ninth grade  Swiss Federal Statistical Office  2010 . This means that students have to become engaged in career planning and decision making comparatively early and  more generally  that adolescence is an important phase of career preparation and development. As a result  research  Heckhausen   Tomasik  2002  Hirschi   L ge  2007b  Neuenschwander   Garrett  2008  Pinquart  Juang    Silbereisen  2003  and counseling practice  Marty  Jungo    Zihlmann  2011  in German speaking countries has focused on the adolescent career decision making process and its difficulties.    Unfortunately  the German language version of the MVS has not yet been examined regarding its applicability to this potentially important research and practice group  i.e.  younger adolescents facing their transition from school to VET . Moreover  all results reported by J rin Fux  2006  were based on earlier versions of the published scale which consisted of only 16 items  one item for each of the subaspects  information and barriers  was added later . The first aim of the present study was therefore to investigate the applicability of the German language MVS to adolescents with respect to reliability and factor structure using confirmatory factor analysis  CFA .    Our second goal was to provide additional information about the construct validity in terms of the nomological validity of the scale with this group  Peter  1981 . While there is some support for the nomological validity of the scale  no research has ever investigated how individual differences in the assessed career decision making difficulties are related to the adolescents  personality dispositions. Understanding the relationship between personality traits and problems in career decision making would also have important consequences for the theoretical understanding of adolescent career preparation and counseling intervention practice.    Back to Top   Personality and Career Decision Making Difficulties   There is solid evidence that personality dispositions are related to various aspects of vocational and organizational behavior  Tokar  Fischer    Mezydlo Subich  1998 . Regarding career decision making  research has confirmed that difficulties in this area are significantly related to personality traits such as trait negative affectivity  neuroticism  and negative self evaluations in terms of career specific and generalized self efficacy and control beliefs  e.g.  Di Fabio  2006  Lounsbury  Hutchens    Loveland  2005  Saka   Gati  2007 . This pattern was mirrored in findings with the English language MVS  which showed across many studies that a high score in vocational identity was related to being more extroverted  more conscientious  and less neurotic  Holland et al.  1993 . Although we are not aware of research linking the MVS to personality traits in adolescence  research investigating the English version of the MVS scale with adolescents showed positive relationships between higher vocational identity scores and critical consciousness  i.e.  the capacity to recognize and overcome sociopolitical barriers   Diemer   Blustein  2007   career search activities  Gushue  Clarke  Pantzer    Scanlan  2006  Gushue  Scanlan  Pantzer    Clarke  2006   career decision making self efficacy beliefs  Gushue  Scanlan et al.  2006   but not family interaction patterns  Hargrove  Creagh    Burgess  2002 . Extending this research  we hypothesize that individual differences in personality dispositions predict differences in scores in career decision making difficulties as assessed using the German language MVS with Swiss adolescents. Specifically  based on existing research with the German and the English versions of the MVS  we expect that adolescents reporting more problems in career decision making in terms of vocational identity  information  and barriers are more neurotic  less extraverted  less conscientious  have more negative generalized self efficacy beliefs  and more external control beliefs.    Back to Top   Method   Back to Top   Participants   Four groups  N   860  of adolescents from the German speaking part of Switzerland participated in the study. Two groups participated in two preliminary studies. Preliminary Study 1 included 148 students  82 boys   55   in the eighth  91   and ninth grade  their ages ranging from 13 to 16 years  M   14.3  SD   0.7 . Participants in Preliminary Study 2 were 68 students in the eighth grade  34  boys . Age was not assessed for this group.    For the main study  two additional groups were included. The first group consisted of Swiss secondary school students at the beginning of the eighth grade  n   341  aged 12 16 years  M   14.1  SD   0.7  50  girls  82  of Swiss nationality  the rest mostly from southeastern Europe . The majority  63   attended a school type with advanced requirements  Sekundarschule   the others attended one with basic requirements  Realschule . The second group consisted of 303 high school students in the eleventh grade  aged 15 to 20 years  M   17.4  SD   1.0  69  girls  81  Swiss nationals  the rest mostly from southeastern Europe . Sixty eight percent  n   206  were doing a vocational apprenticeship  the others attended a high school  Gymnasium  and were preparing for college.    Back to Top   The My Vocational Situation Scale   German Language Version   The German language adaptation of the MVS by J rin et al.  2004  was used. The 18 item scale  e.g.   I am not sure about my strengths and weaknesses  interests  and abilities   consists of four subscales tapping problems with identity  seven items   decision making  three items   information  two items   and perceived barriers to career development  six items . The components of identity and decision making can be combined into a 10 item scale representing Holland  Daiger et al. s  1980  notion of vocational identity. Answers in the original format used in Preliminary Study 1 are provided on a 3 point Likert scale with scale values 2  true   1  partially true   and 0  not true   higher scores indicate more reported problems. J rin Fux  2006  reported reliability estimates  Cronbach s  alpha   of .83 for the 10 item vocational identity scale and .81 for the 6 item barriers scale derived from samples of n   643 and n   797  respectively  composed of high school students  university students  and adults. In Preliminary Study 2 and the main study a 5 point Likert scale instead of the original 3 point scale was used with the responses including 1  not true   2  mostly not true   3  partially true   4  mostly true   and 5  true .    Back to Top   Big Five Personality Traits   Neuroticism  Extraversion  Agreeableness  Openness  and Conscientiousness were assessed with the German language adaptation of the NEO FFI  Borkenau   Ostendorf  1993  Costa   McCrae  1992 . The scale consists of 60 statements  e.g.   I am not easily worried   and answers were provided on a 4 point Likert scale ranging from 1  strongly disagree  to 4  strongly agree   Rost  Carstensen    von Davier  1999 . Support for the validity and applicability of the scale for adolescents is provided by L dtke  Trautwein  Nagy  and K ller  2004 . Cronbach s  alpha  for the present sample was .78 for Neuroticism  .75 for Extraversion  .72 for Openness  .68 for Agreeableness  and .77 for Conscientiousness.    Back to Top   Generalized Self Efficacy  GSE  and Locus of Control Beliefs   GSE and externality of control  EC  were assessed with the Fragebogen zu Kompetenz  und Kontroll berzeugungen  FKK  Inventory for the Measurement of Self Efficacy and Externality  Krampen  1991 . The two constructs are measured by 16 items each  e.g.   I can determine very much of what happens in my life   and students are asked to indicate on a 6 point Likert scale ranging from 1  very wrong  to 6  very true  how much the statements apply to them. Support for the applicability and validity among adolescents is provided by Krampen  1991 . The  alpha s within the present sample were .70 for GSE and .86 for EC.    Back to Top   Procedure   All students completed the questionnaires in their classrooms under the supervision of their classroom teacher. Since the use of the NEO FFI with young adolescents presented some problems regarding inconsistent factor structure  Roth  2002   it was applied only to the older students in high school. The secondary school students received the MVS and the FKK  and the high school students the MVS  the FKK  and the NEO FFI.    Back to Top   Results   Back to Top   Preliminary Analysis of Reliability   A first preliminary analysis  N   148  was conducted to estimate the reliability of the 10 item vocational identity subscale with the original 3 point Likert scale. The results showed that reliability  Cronbach s  alpha   was only  alpha    .64  90  CI .55 .72   which is significantly lower than the .83 reliability reported by J rin Fux  2006 . A second preliminary study  N   68  was conducted to investigate whether changing the response scale to a 5 point Likert scale could significantly improve the reliability. The results showed that the reliability significantly increased to  alpha    .82  90  CI .75 .88 . These results led to the use of a 5 point Likert scale  instead of the original 3 point scale  in the following main study.    Back to Top   Main Analysis of Reliability   In the main study  N   644   reliability estimates showed  alpha    .80  90  CI .72 .87  for the 7 item identity subscale   alpha    .58  90  CI .52 .63  for the 3 item decision making subscale   alpha    .83  90  CI .81 .85  for the 10 item vocational identity scale   alpha    .44  90  CI .35 .52  for the 2 item information scale   alpha    .69  90  CI .65 .72  for the 6 item barriers scale  and  alpha    .85  90  CI .83 .87  for the total 18 item scale.    Back to Top   Data Analytical Approach for CFA   The first objective of the present study was to examine the internal structure of the MVS questionnaire. Since a theoretical idea of the relationships between the assessed constructs already exists  Holland  Daiger et al.  1980  and the structure of the questionnaire has been examined using EFA  J rin Fux  2006   the use of CFA is indicated  Ullman  2006 . CFA requires the researcher to specify a priori hypotheses about the structure based on existing theory and that those be tested. It provides a stricter test of the factor structure  thus  it is particularly well suited for use after certain ideas about the structure of the construct have been theoretically developed and empirically examined using EFA  van Prooijen   van der Kloot  2001 . In the present study  confirmatory factor analysis was conducted with Mplus 6.1  Muth n   Muth n  2010 .    In the case of the MVS questionnaire  four factors were proposed based on theory   1  problems with identity   2  decision making   3  information  and  4  perceived barriers to career development  Holland  Daiger et al.  1980  J rin Fux  2006 . Consistent with this theory  J rin Fux  2006  extracted four factors when analyzing the German version using EFA with oblique rotation. However  not all items displayed their highest loadings on the theoretically expected factor and hence the meaning of the four empirically derived factors differed from theory  J rin Fux  2006 . To address this contradiction between theory and exploratory empirical results  several models were tested and compared in this study as outlined below. To begin  we tested the following three models.