   Abstract   Successful emotion regulation is a key aspect of efficient social functioning and personal well being. Difficulties in emotion regulation lead to relationship impairments and are presumed to be involved in the onset and maintenance of some psychopathological disorders as well as inappropriate behaviors. Gratz and Roemer  2004  developed the Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale  DERS   a comprehensive instrument measuring emotion regulation problems that encompasses several dimensions on which difficulties can occur. The aim of the present work was to develop a French translation of this scale and to provide an initial validation of this instrument. The French version was created using translation and backtranslation procedures and was tested on 455 healthy students. Congruence between the original and the translated scales was .98  Tucker s phi  and internal consistency of the translation reached .92  Cronbach s  alpha  . Moreover  test retest scores were highly correlated. Altogether  the initial validation of the French version of the DERS  DERS F  offers satisfactory results and permits the use of this instrument to map difficulties in emotion regulation in both clinical and research contexts.      Emotion regulation is defined as the set of processes involved in coping with relatively strong emotional episodes  Kopp  1989 . More specifically  emotion regulation refers to the processes that initiate  maintain  and or modulate feelings and emotion related physiological activities  Eisenberg   Spinrad  2004 . These processes are used to influence the kinds of emotions that are felt as well as how and when they are expressed  Gross  1998 . Emotion regulation intervenes when the current emotion impedes individuals  goal achievement and is accomplished through forcing the emotional system into another configuration  Hoeksma  Oosterlaan    Schipper  2004 .    Functional emotion regulation permits the individual to successfully interact in various domains of his her social life  at work  as well as in more intimate relationships  Gross   Munoz  1995 . In order to achieve appropriate emotion regulation  one must be able to understand  accept  and modulate emotions  as well as to adapt one s behavior in response to various kinds of situations. Deficits in these abilities result in difficulties to achieve successful emotion regulation  Gratz   Roemer  2004 . Several articles have discussed the long term consequences of difficulties in emotion regulation  see Davidson  Putnam    Larson  2000  Denollet  Nykl cek    Vingerhoets  2008  Philippot  Baeyens  Douilliez    Francart  2004 . In addition to social difficulties due to poor emotional management  emotion regulation failure may also be present in numerous psychopathological disorders  Gross  2002  Gross   Levenson  1997   including depression  Gross   Munoz  1995 .    Instruments that assess emotion regulation difficulties are useful for measuring the extent of the regulation impairments in patients and for identifying potential therapy goals. In turn  research evaluating emotion regulation competences in healthy participants  while investigating the development of emotional processes  can help us to better understand the respective effects of emotion and emotion regulation on outcomes such as expressivity or subjective feeling.    Gratz and Roemer  2004  developed an instrument to specifically identify difficulties in emotion regulation  the Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale  DERS . This instrument aims to assess emotion regulation difficulties in a comprehensive manner. Indeed  the authors deplored the fact that previous studies on emotion regulation difficulties considered emotion regulation from a single point of view  often emphasizing only one facet of the construct  e.g.  either control of experience  control of expression  or modulation of experience . Thus  the DERS items were chosen to simultaneously evaluate difficulties in four domains of emotion regulation   1  awareness and understanding of emotion   2  acceptance of emotion   3  ability to adopt goal directed behaviors  and  4  ability to access efficient regulation strategies. A key feature of this scale is that it groups a variety of elements known to be involved in emotion regulation into a single instrument.    Practitioners as well as researchers studying emotional processes find useful to be able to comprehensively address the broad concept of emotion regulation difficulties with a single instrument. It would thus be beneficial to distribute the DERS broadly  including in non English speaking countries. Given the lack of such an instrument in the French language  the aim of the present research was to develop and examine the structure and consistency of a French version of the DERS  named the DERS F. Here  we introduce the DERS F and the results of its initial validation in healthy adults.    Back to Top   Method   Back to Top   Participants   A sample of 455 students  423 women  32 men  filled out the questionnaire to allow us to examine the factor structure and the consistency of the scale. Their mean age was 24.2 years  SD   6.1 . 75   341  of the participants were French native speakers  5   24  spoke Spanish  5   22  Italian  4   17  German  and 11   51  had some other native language. All participants were enrolled in a university program taught in French and either received course credit  psychology students  or were paid for their participation.    To explore the test retest reliability of the scale  41 psychology students  36 women  5 men  completed the DERS F twice  with a nine week interval between tests. Their mean age was 23.1 years  SD   5.8 . More than 80  of these participants were French native speakers and all of them were enrolled in a university program taught in French. These participants received course credit for their participation.    Back to Top   Original Instrument   The final version of the DERS in English contains 36 items that estimate the severity of the deficits in the four emotion regulation domains mentioned above. All items are scored on a five point Likert scale from 1   almost never to 5   almost always  which indicates the frequency of the behavior described in each item.    The DERS has been validated by its authors. From the results of 357 participants  principal axis factor extraction and Promax rotation triggered a six factor structure that accounted for 55.68  of the total variance. The instrument thus assesses six underlying dimensions  named  1  nonacceptance of emotional response   2  difficulties in adopting goal directed behaviors   3  difficulties in controlling impulsive behaviors   4  lack of emotional awareness   5  limited access to emotion regulation strategies  and  6  lack of emotional identification or clarity. Most but not all factor pairs correlated with one another  r   .08 to r   .63 . Internal consistency  Cronbach s  alpha   was relatively high  .93 . Each factor of the scale had an internal consistency over .80. A test retest reliability analysis  using intraclass correlation coefficients  with 21 participants and a 4  to 8 week interval between tests revealed a strong reproducibility of the scores   rho    .88 for the total scale score .    Back to Top   Translated Instrument   First  the 36 items of the English version of the DERS were translated into French. Translation was mainly performed by the first author  with the help of other Geneva Emotion Research Group members on selected items. The culture and language particularities of the targeted population were extensively taken into account during translation  see Hambleton  2001  and Hambleton   Patsula  1999  to ensure the best fit to a French speaking population. The first translated version was then backtranslated in accordance with the recommendation by Massoubre and collaborators  Massoubre  Lang  Jaeger  Jullien    Pellet  2002 . Four psychology students were recruited to backtranslate the scale  three women and one man  with a mean age of 27 years  SD   9.7 . They all had extensive knowledge of the English language  they all began to learn English before age 4 and followed at least 1 year of school in an English speaking country . A comparison of the items led to the immediate acceptance of 21 translated items as at least three of the four backtranslators exactly reproduced the original English items. Eleven item translations were corrected due to details that were found to be missing in the English backtranslation  and the Geneva Research Group members discussed the remaining four items to find more appropriate translations. A final translation of the 36 item scale was then retained for testing. The final items with the associated theoretical factors are presented in Table 1 .   Graphic Table 1   Back to Top   Procedure  Graphic Table 1 b Tested ite...   Participants completed the DERS F as well as other questionnaires measuring several aspects of their personality  emotional life  and anxiety state. The presentation order of the questionnaires was randomized. Testing took place during the participant selection of another study. Participants provided informed consent prior to the session. All participants were informed about the confidential nature of the data. Participants were tested in groups of 8 to 20 participants in a seminar room. They were instructed to complete the questionnaires individually  they were assured of the absence of good or bad answers and were told that they should not spend too much time on each item. The specific instruction for the DERS F was a French version of the following   The DERS F is a scale assessing your attention to your emotions in everyday life and to what extent you use such information. For each item  tick to what degree it corresponds to you.  The session lasted about 1 h. The students were then debriefed  either just after the session or in a separate session a few weeks after testing.    Back to Top   Statistical Analyses   For comparison purposes  statistical analyses were based on the initial validation procedure  English version  described by Gratz and Roemer  2004 . Exploratory factor analysis was performed  as well as exploration of the internal consistency of the scale and the six predicted subscales. Finally  an analysis of the test retest procedure was performed.    Back to Top   Results   Back to Top   Exploratory Analysis   A first exploratory factor analysis  principal axis factoring with Promax rotation  gave a solution of seven factors according to the scree test criterion  Cattell  1966  and a confirmation by line fit to remaining eigenvalues  R2 .90  see Nelson  2005 . This solution explained 64.5  of the total variance. Each item was categorized into the factor for which the absolute value of the rotated loading was maximal. One factor was strictly identical to the original solution   2  Difficulties in adopting goal directed behaviors.  Five factors were very similar to the original solution  with only one or two items which were not in the expected factor   1  Nonacceptance of emotional response   only Item 23 missing    3  Difficulties in controlling impulsive behaviors   only Item 3 missing    4  Lack of emotional awareness   Items 17 and 34 missing    5  Limited access to emotion regulation strategies   Item 22 missing and additional Item 23 included   and  6  Lack of emotional identification or clarity   additional Item 3 included . Three items  17  22  and 34  were assigned to Factor 7.    Back to Top   Exploration of a Six Factor Structure   Another exploratory factor analysis with the same extraction rotation parameters was performed. This time  however  the number of factors was set to six  i.e.  the number of factors chosen by the authors of the DERS . This solution explained 61.2  of the total variance. As in the first analysis  each item was assigned to the factor for which the absolute value of the rotated loading was highest. A matrix of the loadings resulting from this analysis is presented in Table 2 .   Graphic Table 2   Only two items  3 and 23  did not load maximally on the same factor as the other items presumed to belong to the same subscale. Item 3 s loading on the expected factor was however very close to the highest loading observed  .24 and .27  respectively . Separate extractions performed for each theoretical factor led to the correct assignment of the two problematic items to their own original factor  no separation into multiple factors   although presenting generally less affiliation with them  factor loadings  Item 3  .59  mean loading of the other items on the factor  .82  and Item 23  .57  mean loading of the other items on the factor  .83 . Correlations between subscales were then calculated and are presented in Table 3 . For this analysis  scores on each factor were computed by taking into account the original categorization of items.   Graphic Table 3   Overall  the French version was 94  compatible with the original scale. To better estimate the congruence between the original version and its translation  Tucker s phi congruence index was computed for each factor  Tucker  1951  Zumbo  Sireci    Hambleton  2003 . With a mean index of .98 for the scale  ranging between .96 and .99  the two versions are highly congruent. Details concerning factor congruency are reported in Table 4 .   Graphic Table 4   Back to Top   Internal Consistency   Cronbach s  alpha  of the overall scale was .92. Deletion of the two problematic items  see above  did not increase this value. Table 5 presents the Cronbach s  alpha  for the six theoretical factors.   Graphic Table 5   Corrected item total correlations  CITC  for each item ranged from r   .14 to r   .68  p   .001  for 34 items of the scale  including the two items that did not maximally load on their presumed factor  3 and 23 . Items 10 and 17 were not significantly correlated with the total score  r   .03 and r   0  respectively . Table 6 presents  for each theoretical factor  the means  and ranges  of inter item and corrected item subscale total correlations.   Graphic Table 6   Back to Top   Test Retest Reliability   The intra class correlation between the two overall scores obtained with a 9 week interval was  rho    .88  p   .01 . Intra class correlations between scores on each of the factors were  rho    .74 for Factor 1   Nonacceptance of emotional response     rho    .76 for Factor 2   Difficulties in adopting goal directed behaviors     rho    .83 for Factor 3   Difficulties in controlling impulsive behaviors     rho    .67 for Factor 4   Lack of emotional awareness     rho    .90 for Factor 5   Limited access to emotion regulation strategies    and  rho    .79 for Factor 6   Lack of emotional identification or clarity  . All coefficients were significant at p   .01.