Several studies have shown that dyadic coping  that is  the way couples cope with stress  plays a unique role in intimate relationships. The aim of this study is to validate the Portuguese version of the Dyadic Coping Inventory  DCI  Bodenmann  2008  by analyzing the factorial structure and psychometric properties of the DCI as well as its convergent and criterion validity. A multigroup confirmatory factor analysis was conducted in a community sample of 605 participants living in Portugal who had been in a close relationship for at least 2 years. The findings support the hypothesized five factor structure for the DCI and self  and other perception  and a two factor structure for joint dyadic coping. The psychometric properties of the DCI and its criterion validity with other relationship measures  RAS and B SRQ  were good. These results add an important contribution to the determination of the criterion validity of the DCI with measures of other crucial domains of couples  functioning  Shared Meaning  Conflict Processes  and Quality of Sexuality  Passion  and Romance   to the cross cultural validation of the DCI  and to the demonstration that negative DC has a significant effect on intimate relationship processes  which contradicts the findings of previous studies. Moreover  it provides an additional tool for working with Portuguese speaking individuals all over the world.      In the past two decades  stress and coping within intimate relationships have received increased attention in psychological research and interventions. Stress is a well known risk factor for individuals  but also for couples  as it promotes poor subjective well being  poor relationship functioning  and a higher risk of dissolution of the relationship  Randall   Bodenmann  2009 . On the other hand  good dyadic coping  DC  has proved to be a protective factor that is associated with better relationship quality  less negative interaction between partners  fewer psychological problems  better physical well being  and greater relationship stability  see Bodenmann  Randall    Cutrona  in press  Revenson  Kayser    Bodenmann  2005 . Interestingly  DC affects well being above and beyond individual coping strategies  Falconier  Nussbeck    Bodenmann  2012  Papp   Witt  2010 .    Given that this construct is highly relevant for understanding intimate processes and outcomes  this study aims to validate the Portuguese version of the Dyadic Coping Inventory  DCI  developed by Bodenmann  2008 . It is important to have a Portuguese version of this questionnaire for several reasons   1  there is presently no measure of DC in Portuguese   2  Portuguese is the sixth most often spoken language in the world  with over 200 million native speakers widely distributed in many parts of the world  Wolfram Alpha  2011    3  the divorce rate in Portugal is very high  in 2009  66  of all marriages 1 ended in divorce  Pordata  2009   and  4  many Portuguese live as immigrant workers in foreign countries  which may make them more vulnerable to stress. The Portuguese version of the DCI may help us to better understand the process of DC among Portuguese speaking individuals. This understanding in turn may help mental health professionals in their work with this population.    Back to Top   The Systemic Transactional Dyadic Coping Model   Bodenmann s  1997  2005  concept of DC is a genuine systemic transactional approach  extending Lazarus  stress and coping theory  Lazarus   Folkman  1984  to a dyadic perspective. It considers not only support from the partner  but also joint DC as a response to stress. According to Bodenmann s model  DC is a circular interpersonal process involving both individual and partner appraisals  common goals  and resources. This process begins with the verbal or nonverbal communication of specific stress signals by one partner and is followed by the perception and interpretation of these signs by the other partner   and then his her reactions. These reactions can be  1  ignoring  due to lack of motivation or skill deficits    2  stress contagion  or  3  DC by engaging in supportive or joint DC  e.g.  Bodenmann  1995  2005 .    Positive forms of DC are  supportive DC  problem  or emotion focused   which refers to assistance from the nonstressed partner to the other  e.g.  practical advice  help with daily tasks  empathy  allying  exploration of solutions   delegated DC  which results from the stressed partner explicitly asking the other to take over some of his her ordinary tasks and functions  and joint DC  which occurs when both partners are directly affected by the stressful event and engage in a symmetric or complementary  problem  or emotion focused process of coping  e.g.  joint information solution seeking  sharing of feelings  mutual commitment  or relaxation together . Negative DC includes hostile DC  distant or criticizing support  minimizing the severity of the partner s stress   ambivalent DC  unmotivated provision of support   and superficial DC  vague or uninspired support  Bodenmann  2005 .    Further strengths of Bodenmann s model of DC are as follows   1  a questionnaire  DCI  has been developed that assesses the different dimensions of the construct   2  the model has been evaluated in different contexts and with large samples in different countries  and  3  the model has preventive and clinical implications as reflected in Couples Coping Enhancement Training  CCET  Bodenmann   Shantinath  2004  and Coping Oriented Couples Therapy  COCT  Bodenmann  2010 . In the context of intimate relationships  DC is not a selfless behavior  but rather a couple s mutual engagement to reduce a partner s or the couple s stress. It serves to foster a feeling of we ness and  thus  to protect and boost the relationship quality  Bodenmann  2005  Vedes  Bodenmann  Nussbeck  Randall    Lind  2013 .    Back to Top   The DCI and Validation Studies   The nine subscales of the DCI assess three domains of DC and evaluate discrepancies regarding equity  congruence  and reciprocity between the two partners. These measures have important implications for couples interventions and research  Bodenmann  2008 .    Apart from the evaluation study with 2 399 Swiss participants presented in the German DCI manual  Bodenmann  2008   in which the original structure of the DCI was statistically analyzed  only three DCI validation studies have been published to date. In the evaluation study  using exploratory factor analysis  EFA   Bodenmann found a four factor structure for the self  and partner domains of DC  i.e.  Stress Communication  Supportive DC  Delegated DC  Negative DC  and a one factor domain for Joint DC. Thus  although Bodenmann s theory of DC proposes that Supportive and Joint DC can be emotion  or problem focused  they load on the same factor in the statistical analysis of the questionnaire. Also  Negative DC  albeit theoretically distinguished in different forms  statistically constitutes a one factor construct.    One validation study conducted an EFA and a confirmatory factor analysis  CFA   whereby the CFA was only at the subscale level  comparing three language groups in Switzerland  Italian  French  and German  see Ledermann et al.  2010 . This study  after excluding items 2 and 3  in the French and Italian groups  replicated the structure found in the evaluation study.    Another validation study was done in a Northern Italian sample  Donato et al.  2009  with a 41 item version of the DCI. The authors used CFA and did not completely replicate the original structure  but rather reported a five factor solution  i.e.  Stress Communication  emotion  and problem focused Supportive DC  Delegated DC  and Negative DC  for self  and partner domains and a three factor solution for Joint DC  problem focused  seeking closeness  and relaxation . The most recent validation study also used a CFA to analyze the DCI structure in a Latin American immigrant sample  Falconier et al.  2012  and found the same five factor solution for self  and partner domains and a two factor structure for Joint DC  i.e.  emotion  and problem focused   after excluding six items  2  3  15  17  18  26 .    Therefore  the empirical distinction between emotion  and problem focused DC found in some studies is in line with Bodenmann s theoretical model  though it has only been found in the Latin American and Italian samples and in studies using a confirmatory approach. Findings concerning the criterion validity of the DCI have been highly consistent. Relationship satisfaction is positively associated with positive DC and negatively associated with negative DC  Bodenmann  2005 . In addition  positive forms of DC have been found to be associated with constructive communication in couples  Bodenmann  2008  Ledermann et al.  2010   effective individual coping strategies  Falconier et al.  2012  Papp   Witt  2010   constructive conflict resolution  Falconier et al.  2012   and stronger perceptions of we ness  Vedes et al.  2013 . In addition  the DCI has demonstrated good predictive explanatory power  being able to predict relationship quality and stability over a 2  to 5 year period  Bodenmann   Cina  2006  Bodenmann  Pihet    Kayser  2006 .    Almost all reported studies  as in other studies in the context of intimate relationships  see Karney   Bradbury  2010   analyzed convenience samples  which limits the generalizability of the findings. All of the validation study samples  including ours  were quite similar concerning relationship length  mean age  education level  number of children  and recruitment strategy. Specifically  our sample is a national sample  more heterogeneous concerning income  although the ratio between groups is more unequal but still adequate. Thus  the results of DCI validation studies can only be generalized to the age range  income  SES  and relationship satisfaction of the population of participants who volunteer to take part in the studies.    Back to Top   Purpose   This study investigates the psychometric properties of the Portuguese version of the DCI. We inspect the factor structure  hypothesizing that we will result in a five factor solution for the partner domains of DC and a two factor solution for joint DC due to cultural similarities between Italy and Portugal as well as with Spanish speaking migrants in the United States. Furthermore  we examine the internal reliability of the DCI subscales as well as their convergent and criterion validity  not only with measures of relationship satisfaction  but also with measures of Shared Meaning  Conflict Processes  and Quality of Sexuality  Romance  and Passion. In addition  we explore gender differences.    Back to Top   Method   Back to Top   Participants   A group of 605 individuals living in Portugal  23.6  male and 76.4  female  participated in this study. The women s mean age was 36.0  SD   9.7   and the men s mean age was 40.7  SD   10.5 . All participants had been in a close relationship for at least 2 years. The majority of participants were married  74.2    the remaining 25.8  had been cohabitating for at least 2 years. On average  married participants had been together for 11.5 years  SD   10.6  and cohabitating participants for 5.5 years  SD   4.0 . Also  69.8  of the participants had children  Mdn   2 . Participants were on average satisfied with their relationship  M   3.9  SD   .79  min   1.57  max   5  for men  M   3.9  SD   .87  min   1.43  max   5 for women .    As to education  45.5  of men and 49.8  of women had a college degree. For the majority of women  61   and men  60    monthly income was between EUR 500 and EUR 1 499  i.e.  low middle SES . The minimum living wage in Portugal is EUR 485 per month  PORDATA  2012 .    Back to Top   Measures   Back to Top   DCI  Bodenmann  2008    The DCI is a self report inventory with 37 items  measured on a five point Likert scale  1   very rarely to 5   very often . The original DCI has nine subscales  Stress Communication by Self  Stress Communication by Partner  or Other   Supportive DC by Self  Supportive DC by Partner  Negative DC by Self  Negative DC by Partner  Delegated DC by Self  Delegated DC by Partner  and Joint DC. The first eight subscales describe behavior shown either by oneself or by one s partner  whereas the Joint DC subscale describes behavior shown jointly by both partners. All nine subscales can be used to describe DC behavior. In addition  two items  36 and 37  evaluate how satisfied individuals are with their DC  though these items are not used to describe DC behavior itself. The mean of all 35 items  recoding items 7  10  11  15  22  25  26  27  serves as the total score for the DCI. The DCI has shown good reliabilities in previous validation studies  see Bodenmann  2008  Donato et al.  2009  Falconier et al.  2012  Ledermann et al.  2010 .    Back to Top   Relationship Assessment Scale  RAS  Hendrick  Dicke    Hendrick  1998    The RAS is a seven item measure that assesses a couple s relationship satisfaction using a five point Likert scale. The Portuguese version of the RAS  Santos et al.  2000  revised by Lind  2008  has shown excellent psychometric properties in several samples. In the present study  Cronbach s  alpha  was .92 for men and .94 for women.    Back to Top   Brief Sound Relationship Questionnaires  B SRQ  Gottman   Gottman  2006    The B SRQ is a short version of the original Sound Relationship House Questionnaires  developed on the basis of Gottman s theory  Gottman  1999 . These true false scales were developed to assess the domains of couple functioning relevant to quality  stability  and communication patterns within marriage. In the present study  we used the following established domains  with five items each    1  Shared Meaning  subscales Rituals  Roles  Goals  and Symbols    2  Constructive Conflict Processes  subscales Accepting Influence  Effective Repair Attempts  and Compromise   and  3  Destructive Conflict Processes  subscales Harsh Startup  the Four Horsemen  Gridlock on Perpetual Issues  Flooding  and Negative Sentiment Override .    In addition  we administered 10 items  1  4  6  7  8  9  11  12  13  14  from the long version subscale called Quality of Sexuality  Romance  and Passion  Gottman   Gottman  2009  to cover that aspect of relationship quality. We selected the items on the basis of two criteria   1  focus on we ness and  2  no redundancy with other included items. All domains used in North American studies  Gottman  2003  Ryan   Gottman  2000  and all domains of the Portuguese version  which we used  have shown good reliabilities. In this study  Cronbach s  alpha  for the Quality of Sexuality  Romance  and Passion subscale was .90 for men and .89 women  for Shared Meaning was .90 for both sexes  for Constructive Conflict Processes was .82 for men and .80 for women  and for Destructive Conflict Processes was .94 for both sexes.    Back to Top   Procedure   A native speaker of Portuguese translated the English version of the DCI into Portuguese  and a bilingual professional translator backtranslated it into English. These two versions were then compared to ensure the accuracy of the translation. Several pretests were conducted  Portuguese version available upon request  to ensure that the participants completely understood the scale.    Individuals were recruited by flyers distributed in different settings  e.g.  schools  family and children s associations  hospitals  cultural associations . The flyers invited people to voluntarily participate in our online research study by filling out a few questionnaires about intimate relationships. The inclusion criteria were   1  being married or having cohabitated for at least 2 years   2  living in Portugal   3  being at least 18 years old  and  4  providing informed consent.    Back to Top   Analytic Strategy   Based on the hypothesized five factor structure  i.e.  Stress Communication  Emotion  and Problem focused Supportive DC  Delegated DC  and Negative DC  for self  and other perceptions and the two factor structure for Joint DC  i.e.  emotion  and problem focused  for both sexes  we conducted a multigroup confirmatory factor analysis. Sex was chosen as a grouping variable to detect possible differences between male and female participants. All analyses were run using Mplus6  Muth n   Muth n  1998 2010  using a robust version of the maximum likelihood estimator with mean  and variance adjusted  chi   statistics  MLMV estimator . Goodness of fit was determined using the  chi   test. Bentler s comparative fit index  CFI   the root mean square residual of approximation  RMSEA   and the standardized root mean square residual  SRMR  were used to assess goodness of model fit  whereby  following Hu and Bentler  1999  CFI   .95  RMSEA   .06  SRMR   .08 were considered to indicate good model fit . The Akaike information criterion  AIC  was used to assess the goodness of model fit of nonnested models.    For each perspective  own DC and other DC   two multigroup models were run  a four factor  as originally proposed for DCI  and a five factor solution  as found in non Swiss samples . For joint DC  a one factor and a two factor model were run to test whether participants differed with respect to emotion  and problem focused Joint DC. After identifying the factorial structure  additional invariance restrictions on model parameters were implemented until the best model was found. Due to unequal group size  in a first step  all models were run separately for male and female participants. In a second step  the loadings and intercepts of male participants were restricted to the female participants  values. All models showed adequate fit to the data  so only the results of multigroup models are reported.    Cronbach s  alpha  was used to estimate the reliabilities of the scales and subscales. Spearman correlations were estimated to analyze the convergent validity of the subscales  whereby moderate to high  but not perfect  correlations were expected. Criterion validity was examined by comparing the DCI  sub scales to the RAS and B SRQ subscales. Finally  scale means were compared across sexes.    Back to Top   Results   Back to Top   DCI Structure   The results of the fit indices showed that the hypothesized five factor models for self  and other perceptions fit the data acceptably. The AIC indicated that the five factor solutions fit the data better than the four factor solution did. The restricted two factor solution for Joint DC outperformed the one factor and unrestricted two factor solution in terms of model fit  as shown in Table 1  . Imposing measurement invariance restrictions  i.e.  requiring loading parameters and intercepts to be equal across sexes  yielded acceptably well fitting models  as compared to unconstrained models as well . The application of additional restrictions  factorial means  variances  or covariances  resulted in a significant decrease in model fit. Thus  men and women appear to have used the DCI in the same manner.   Graphic Table 1   As illustrated in Figure 1  standardized factor loadings for self perceptions ranged from .45 to .88 for men and from .49 to .89 for women. For other perceptions  the factor loadings ranged from .52 to .91 for men and from .51 to .94 for women. For Joint DC  the factor loadings ranged from .46 to .94 for men and from .52 to .92 for women.   Graphic Figure 1   Item 32   We engage in a serious discussion about the problem  and we think about what must be done   showed lower factor loadings  .46 for men and .52 for women  than in other DCI validation studies. This may be due to the fact that  in Portuguese   discussion  has an ambiguous meaning and can be interpreted as being either positive  constructive conversation  or negative  arguments . So  we suggest that the word  discussion  be replaced by  conversation  in future studies. As in other studies  items 2 and 17 showed relatively low factor loadings  .45 and .52 for men  .49 and .51 for women   but we do not recommend dropping them since the model fits ranged from acceptable to very good.