   Abstract   This research project was undertaken in response to Kluger and DeNisi s  1996  call for more primary studies to investigate specific propositions of the feedback intervention theory  FIT . To study the assumptions of FIT on the level of task motivation processes  we analyzed the impact of combined positive and negative feedback. Participants  N   413  performed a series of tasks in which they were to indicate the number of athletes appearing in short video sequences of different sports. After each task performance the participants received manipulated feedback and were to choose between predetermined options  e.g.  raise the level of difficulty  maintain the level of difficulty . We found that the participants most frequently raised the difficulty level after receiving positive feedback and maintained the level after receiving negative feedback. There were no significant differences in the performance of participants who raised and those who maintained the difficulty level after receiving positive or negative feedback. However  the performance of participants who raised the difficulty level after receiving positive feedback increased more than that of those who maintained the difficulty level after receiving negative feedback. In addition  we observed an increase in participants  avoidance behavior in response to repeated negative feedback. The results partially confirmed the assumptions of the FIT.      The influence of feedback on human behavior is extensive. Various studies have shown the impact of feedback on different behavioral aspects  such as motivation  e.g.  Butler   Nisan  1986  Deci  Koestner    Ryan  1999  Jussim  Soffin  Brown  Ley    Kohlhepp  1992  Narciss  2004   learning  e.g.  Black   Wiliam  1998  Goodman   Wood  2004  Narciss   Huth  2004  Pashler  Cepeda  Wixted    Rohrer  2005  Wulf  Shea    Lewthwaite  2010   and goal orientation  e.g.  Cron  Slocum  VandeWalle    Fu  2005  Phillips  Hollenbeck    Ilgen  1996  Senko   Harackiewicz  2005  VandeWalle  Cron    Slocum  2001 . Feedback allows one to compare the actual state with the target state and discover a discrepancy between actual and desired achievement. Thus  it enables one to evaluate one s previous performance in relation to a specific goal or standard. The perception of a possible discrepancy influences subsequent performance.    Feedback information can originate from external sources  e.g.  teacher  or internal sources  information derived by task processing itself  e.g.  proprioceptive perceptions in a motor task   Butler   Winne  1995  Magill  2001  Narciss  2008 . In line with this notion  Narciss  2008  suggested the existence of two feedback loops  one that involved the comparison of internal feedback to an internal reference value derived from a subjective estimation of task demands and another that involved the comparison of external feedback to an external reference value mainly derived from external information  i.e.  instructional goals . Thus  external feedback loops may correspond or conflict with internal feedback loops. Both processes interact and together determine the impact of feedback. In particular  Butler and Winne  1995  called attention to the significant role of internal feedback in enabling self regulated learning  where a high amount of self regulation is tied to an effective and economic learning process. Such learners monitor themselves and their process of engagement by creating and analyzing internal feedback  see also Hattie  2002 . Thus  external feedback primarily assists the perception of discrepancies between the internally represented actual and target state. It represents additional information confirming or moderating internal feedback and may help the learner to successfully execute self regulated learning  Butler   Winne  1995  Ilgen   Davis  2000  Narciss  2008 .    Numerous studies  see Bangert Drowns  Kulik  Kulik    Morgan  1991  Hattie   Timperley  2007  Kluger   DeNisi  1996  Mason   Bruning  2001  Mory  2004  Narciss  2008  Shute  2008  have revealed conflicting findings where feedback could have a positive  negative  or even a debilitating effect on performance. For example  Shute  2008  pointed out that despite a large amount of feedback research  many conflicting and minor findings continue to exist. So far  several theoretical frameworks have been proposed and adopted that specifically try to explain these controversial feedback effects  e.g.  Bangert Drowns et al.  1991  Butler   Winne  1995  Hattie   Timperley  2007  Mason   Bruning  2001  Narciss  2008 . The feedback intervention theory  FIT   developed by Kluger and DeNisi  1996   is one of the most important of these theories. The authors called for more primary studies to investigate specific propositions of their theory. This research paper is a response to this call. To study the assumptions of FIT with respect to task motivation processes  we examined the immediate influence of possible combinations of positive and negative feedback  consistent and inconsistent  on task performance and goal setting.    Back to Top   The Feedback Intervention Theory  FIT    The FIT  Kluger   DeNisi  1996  is based on the assumption that behavior is regulated by comparisons of feedback to goals or standards that are organized hierarchically. The authors distinguished three hierarchical levels at which the impact of feedback on performance differs  task learning processes  task motivation processes  and meta task processes. Attention is usually directed to the intermediate level of the hierarchy  task motivation processes   whereas specific feedback interventions can change the locus of attention. Therefore  the style of feedback plays a crucial role in regulating human performance  Brunot  Huguet    Monteil  2000  Lipnevich   Smith  2009  Podsakoff   Fahr  1989  Shute  2008  Venables   Fairclough  2009 . For example  feedback focused on the details of a task  e.g.  information about the position of one s fingers when one is learning to play the guitar  directs one s attention to the level of task learning processes. Additional information about the appropriate handling of a specific task facilitates the learning process. Hence  the feedback recipient can use this information to improve his or her performance  Butler   Winne  1995 . Numerous studies confirmed this assumption  Feedback has been found to have more influence when details about how to improve performance are provided  Hattie  2002  Hattie   Timperley  2007  Lipnevich   Smith  2009  Magill  2001  Narciss   Huth  2004 .    On the level of task motivation processes  feedback is at first compared to the individual task standard. If a positive feedback standard discrepancy is revealed  the person has the opportunity to pursue other goals. Depending on the occurrence of such an opportunity  the person either raises the standard and increases his her effort or maintains the standard and reduces his her effort  see Bandura  1991  1997  Erez  2005  Hattie  2002  Ilies   Judge  2005  Locke   Latham  1990  McCalley  de Vries    Midden  2011  Phillips et al.  1996 . However  if the feedback standard discrepancy is negative  participant s effort increases. If the subsequent outcome is attained by a reduction in discrepancy  the FIT further suggests that participant s effort increases or is at least maintained  see Cron et al.  2005  Hattie  2002  Ilgen   Davis  2000 . If no reduction in discrepancy can be achieved  attention is either directed toward the level of task learning processes or toward the level of meta task processes  depending on the individual s belief in success.    Feedback that is related to the self  such as explicitly positive or explicitly negative feedback  directs one s attention to the level of meta task processes. Even feedback that contradicted participants  performance history  e.g.  positive feedback for low achievers  was shown to enhance self focused attention  Brunot et al.  2000 . On this level  negative feedback motivates people to reduce the feedback standard discrepancy. Therefore  one possibility is to redirect attention to the task motivation processes and to attempt to improve performance. An easier alternative is to withdraw from the task and engage in other activities  Hattie  2002  Ilgen   Davis  2000  Klein  1997  Pulfrey  Buchs    Butera  2011  Venables   Fairclough  2009 . In this case  performance declines. The main aim at this level is to protect oneself from repeated negative feedback and to attain a positive self image. Ilgen and Davies  2000  emphasized that repeated negative feedback lowers expectations and therefore makes avoidance behavior more probable. Thus  decisions like quitting or choosing a higher task difficulty represent an opportunity to protect one s self image. Raising the level of difficulty diminishes the relevance of repeated negative feedback due to the knowledge of the increased difficulty of the task. Furthermore  the negative feedback is attributed more to the task complexity than to one s own failure.    Kluger and DeNisi  1996  pointed out that their three level hierarchy is an abstraction. They assumed that the hierarchy could be more complex and contain more sublevels. Moreover  it seemed possible that these levels interact with each other  and attention is directed to each level to varying degrees. Therefore  a specific feedback intervention could lead to more than one feedback standard comparison. In addition  the possible discrepancies could be weighted and integrated into an overall reaction to the feedback. Figure 1 summarizes the basic assumptions of the FIT.   Graphic Figure 1   Back to Top   Previous Research on the Impact of Feedback on the Relationship Between Goal Setting and Performance   Feedback research has shown that feedback mostly increased performance  see Bangert Drowns et al.  1991  Hattie   Timperley  2007  Mason   Bruning  2001  Mory  2004  Narciss  2008  Shute  2008 . However  Kluger and DeNisi  1996  revealed in their meta analysis that at least one third of the included studies reported decreasing effects  see also Ilgen   Davis  2000 . According to these results  not only the style of feedback  but also the specificity of goals  e.g.  Erez  2005  Hattie   Timperley  2007  Ilies   Judge  2005  McCalley et al.  2011  VandeWalle et al.  2001  and the characteristics of the task  e.g.  DeShon   Alexander  1996  Hattie   Timperley  2007  Magill  2001  Vancouver   Tischner  2004  have been identified as important factors that moderate feedback effects. The biggest influence on performance may be expected when performing a low difficulty task and goals are attainable  clear  and specific  see DeShon   Alexander  1996  Ilgen   Davis  2000  Kluger   DeNisi  1996 . Previously  Erez  1977  demonstrated that feedback had a significant impact on goal setting and pointed out its role in the relationship between goal setting and performance  Carver   Scheier  1981  Cron et al.  2005  Erez  2005 . Goals represent levels of performance that are attained by individuals. Hence  they enable a person to evaluate his her actions and efforts  Locke   Latham  1990 . Therefore  feedback is necessary for evaluating discrepancies between selected goals and actual achievement by showing one s progress toward the goal. It seems helpful to adjust effort  achievement  strategies  or tactics to meet the target  but also to set reasonable goals. In this regard  it was shown that not only does goal setting affect the impact of feedback but that feedback influences subsequent goal setting  Cron et al.  2005 . Positive feedback was found to enhance recipients  decision to set more difficult goals  whereas negative feedback resulted in a tendency for them to lower their goals  Donovan   Williams  2003  Ilies   Judge  2005  Phillips et al.  1996  Tolli   Schmidt  2008  VandeWalle et al.  2001  Williams  Donovan    Dodge  2000  see also Ilies  Judge    Wagner  2010 . The setting of more difficult goals after receiving positive feedback is tied to social cognitive theory  Bandura  1997   according to which individuals create positive discrepancies  set higher goals than in previous task performances  and try to succeed  as long as they assess the more difficult goals as attainable. Indeed  more difficult goals go along with a lower probability of success but nevertheless greater stimulation by reaching this goal at a higher level of performance  Bandura  1997  Kluger   DeNisi  1996 . On the other hand  creating less challenging goals increases the probability of success. Thus  the chance to rebuild or maintain one s self concept is augmented  Baumeister  1996  Hattie  2002  Kluger   DeNisi  1996  Vancouver   Tischner  2004 . In addition  Klein  1997  demonstrated that normative positive feedback   as opposed to normative negative feedback   enhanced participants  decision to persevere instead of switching to another task. However  these results have to be interpreted carefully considering the individual s assessment of feedback  Podsakoff and Fahr  1989  demonstrated that feedback credibility mediated the relationship between feedback and goal setting as well as performance.    Back to Top   Aims of the Current Study   This study examines the assumptions of the FIT on the level of task motivation processes. Kluger and DeNisi  1996  presumed that changes in achievement and goal setting occur as a result of both positive and negative feedback standard discrepancies. The following hypotheses were deduced  In contrast to positive feedback  raising the standard after receiving negative feedback offers the possibility of decreasing the relevance of repeated negative feedback due to awareness of the increased level of difficulty. Therefore  our next hypotheses were  The FIT assumes an increase in performance when raising the standard after receiving positive feedback or maintaining the standard after receiving negative feedback. As an additional approach and a possible expansion of FIT  we were interested in a comparison of both scenarios.    H1  Following positive feedback  participants raise their standard more often than following negative feedback.    H2  Participants who raise their standard after receiving positive feedback enhance their performance more than participants who maintain their standard after receiving positive feedback.    H3  In the negative feedback condition  participants who practice or maintain their standard enhance their performance more than those who raise their standard.    H4  Repeated negative feedback causes avoidance behavior more often than a single reception of negative feedback.    H5  Participants who raise their standard after receiving positive feedback show an improvement in performance equal to that of participants who maintain their standard after receiving negative feedback.    Back to Top   Method   Back to Top   Participants   The study was conducted at the University of Vienna  Austria  with 413 students  247 female  166 male  participating in exchange for course credit. The participants were students of sports science  n   242  and psychology  n   171 . The average age of the participants was 21.90  SD   3.42  years  ranging from 18 to 43. Data collection took place from November 2009 to April 2010.    Back to Top   Application of the Feedback Intervention Theory   To investigate the impact of positive and negative feedback on performance and goal setting  a computer assisted adaptation of the FIT was constructed. Figure 2 illustrates the configuration schematically. Overall  a task was performed three times and manipulated feedback was presented after the first two task performances. After receiving feedback  participants were asked to choose between predetermined options. Thus  two feedback loops were created in which the impact of feedback on goal setting and performance could be tested  The feedback received after the first time the task was performed allowed us to analyze the impact of feedback on subsequent goal setting and on task performance when the task was performed the second time  first feedback loop . The second feedback loop included the feedback received after the second time the task was performed  subsequent goal setting  and task performance when the task was performed the third time.   Graphic Figure 2   Back to Top   Feedback Conditions   The study was limited to investigating the impact of positive and negative feedback standard discrepancies. Therefore  the manipulation of feedback was appropriate. The feedback interventions used were either positive or negative  irrespective of actual performance. Before performing the task  participants received information concerning the expected average performance on the subsequent task  e.g.  average performance represents a correct response to eight out of 15 items . This information was given to establish a standard of performance. Feedback interventions were based on this standard  In the negative feedback condition  participants were told that they had given two or three correct responses  and that their performance was very below average. In the positive feedback condition  participants were told that they had given 13 or 14 correct answers  and that their performance was very above average. Providing negative or positive feedback after the first two task performances resulted in four different feedback conditions. In the first condition  participants received positive feedback twice  positive positive   in the second  they received negative feedback twice  negative negative . Participants in the third condition received negative feedback after performing the first task and positive feedback after performing the second task  negative positive . In the fourth condition  participants received positive feedback after the first task performance and negative feedback after the second task  positive negative .    Back to Top   Task Performance   To investigate the impact of feedback on performance  we chose a task to measure selective attention. The importance of selective attention for several cognitive performance parameters  e.g.  concentration  memory  perceptual speed  and the possibility of an economical and less time consuming measurement prompted this decision. The items represented short videoclips showing different kinds of sports that had been selected from television broadcasts. The participants  task was to indicate the number of athletes appearing in each clip by pressing the corresponding number key on the computer keyboard. The number of athletes shown ranged from four to nine. The difficulty was to distinguish between active athletes  referees  and substitutes as well as offcourt viewers. Moreover  the duration of the presented videoclips was very short  1 941 ms  and the reaction time was limited  2 000 ms . After the participant s reaction or after time had elapsed  the next videoclip was started. The duration of 1 941 ms resulted from specific characteristics of the software programs for editing and presenting the videoclips. Two tasks were devised  both consisting of 15 items. In previous studies  the internal consistency of both tasks was Cronbach s  alpha    .78. Based on tetrachoric correlation  a split half reliability of r   .90 was achieved. The correlation of the tasks was r   .82. Because of the demand of performing three different tasks in the computer modulation of the FIT  the first task was repeated at the end of the second feedback loop.    Back to Top   Goal Setting   After the first and second feedback intervention  participants were asked to choose between predetermined options. These options were deduced from the task motivation processes of FIT and differed with respect to type  negative or positive  and loop of feedback. There were five options to choose from  whereas three alternatives were presented continuously  maintain the standard  raise the standard  and abort. Maintaining the standard meant choosing a task with the same difficulty level. Raising the standard meant increasing the difficulty level  Participants were told that the following task would be more difficult than the previous one and that the task standard would be higher. This information was simulated  all participants performed the same task in the second feedback loop. This deception was necessary to compare task performance with respect to different decision behaviors. The third option  which was always presented  was to abort the task. An additional alternative was provided in the negative feedback condition  practice and maintain the standard. Participants who chose this option received an additional sequence of three trial items in which immediate feedback for correct answers was presented. Afterwards they were to perform a task with the same level of difficulty. In the repeated negative feedback condition  participants were also given the chance to perform an alternative task  which was a short pair based game. This alternative was offered to introduce the additional possibility of handling repeated negative feedback in contrast to aborting the task.    Back to Top   Procedure   The experiment was conducted under laboratory conditions and for each participant separately. Depending on when they arrived at the laboratory  participants were assigned to one of four feedback conditions. In the run up to the experiment  participants were told that the research was about the development of a task to measure selective attention. After being welcomed  the participants were asked to provide informed consent to participate in the study. The following task was performed on a computer. Participants were told to follow the instructions on the screen. During the experiment  a supervisor stayed in the laboratory to assist with problems or answer participants  questions. At the end of the semester  the actual research objective was revealed to the participants.    Back to Top   Results   Back to Top   Statistical Analysis   Pearson s chi square tests   chi    were conducted to compare goal setting behavior in different feedback conditions. The assumption of an expected cell count of at least five was met consistently. To investigate the effect of the chosen options on achievement  we carried out repeated measures analyses of variance  ANOVA . The sums of correct reactions for each task were included as dependent within subjects variables. The chosen options were used as between subjects factors. The assumptions of repeated measures ANOVA were met and are not specifically reported. Statistical significance in all cases was p   .05.    Back to Top   The First Feedback Loop   Two conditions were analyzed in the first feedback loop. After performing the first task  participants in two feedback conditions  NN and NP  received negative feedback  while those in the other two conditions  PP and PN  received positive feedback. Table 1 shows the frequency of the chosen options with respect to the feedback condition. To examine the first hypothesis  the options  maintain standard  and  practice and maintain standard  in the negative feedback condition were collapsed. One participant aborted the task and was excluded from further data analysis. Pearson s chi square test of the 2   2 contingency table revealed a significant difference between the two conditions   chi     212.86  df   1  p   .001 . After receiving positive feedback  84.5  of the participants raised their standard  whereas only 12.7  chose this option after receiving negative feedback. Thus  Hypothesis 1 was confirmed  Participants who received positive feedback raised their difficulty level significantly more often than those who received negative feedback.   Graphic Table 1   A repeated measures ANOVA was conducted for the positive and the negative feedback conditions separately to test Hypotheses 2 and 3. In the positive feedback condition  we assumed that participants raising the standard would show a greater increase in performance than those maintaining the standard. Repeated measures ANOVA revealed a significant effect of performance in both tasks  F 1  205    44.91  p   .001   eta 2   .18  but no significant interaction between performance and the chosen option  F 1  205    .79  p   .375. Differences in time between participants raising the standard and those maintaining the standard were not significant. The between subjects effect was significant  F 1  205    12.85  p   .001   eta 2   .059. It should be noted that  due to the unequal number of participants raising versus maintaining the standard after receiving positive feedback  the results of repeated measures ANOVA have to be interpreted carefully. Hypothesis 2 had to be rejected. In the negative feedback condition  we hypothesized that participants practicing or maintaining their standard would enhance their performance more than those raising the standard. There were no significant differences in performance between participants selecting different options  F 2  202    .27  p   .766  and there was no significant interaction between the chosen options and task performance  F 2  202    2.47  p   .087. The effect of performance of the first and second task was significant  F 1  202    17.41  p   .001   eta 2   .079. Thus  Hypothesis 3 was rejected. Table 2 shows the means and standard deviations of performance on the first and second task with respect to the selected option and feedback condition.