NEW RESTRICTIONS
 
          In life, people pass through different phases. They are born into a family, and then they grow up and reach puberty. After puberty, they are considered adults. At this time, the sociological burden becomes heavier and new responsibilities are added to a person’s burden. Graduating from a good university, finding a job, getting married and having children are some of these expectations. Most people consider these expectations especially having children reasonable and a source of happiness. However, it is my opinion that children are far away from being the ultimate bliss in our lives; on the contrary, they bring about more responsibilities and restrictions.
 
        Some people claim that children bring happiness and meaning to one’s life. But people also have aims, pleasures and hobbies that contribute to their happiness. Therefore, we do not need children to achieve happiness. Also, in my opinion, children are a burden for the family. Once you give birth to babies, you must do everything to raise them. You must pay for new clothes, nannies, expensive schools, etc. Since you spend all your money on your children, you do not have enough financial resources to do something for yourself.
 
        Children restrict the parents. Since you are always busy with your kids and their problems, you do not have enough time to be with your friends or to do things that give pleasure to you. For instance, you cannot always go out with your spouse or you cannot easily go to the theater, opera or ballet because children are not allowed. If you    are tired or depressed, you will not have the right to spend time alone because you are a parent.
 
        It has been maintained that procreation is instinctive and seeing a part of us continue to live is important. However, it is my contention that bringing children to a world full of uncertainty and danger just to satisfy our own desires is a bit selfish. Today there are lots of dangerous events in the world and we do not know what will happen      in the future. A war that will destroy most of the world, a nuclear bomb, threat of global warming and radiation are some possible things that our new generation will have to cope with.
 
        Some people advocate that   children are our insurance for our old age. This idea might be true in traditional families, but there are no more traditional families today. Now you rear children with lots of difficulty, and then they   get married and leave you. I mean  kids are no guarantee against loneliness.
 
        In conclusion, having children brings lots of responsibilities, restrictions and problems. Also bringing children to a world that is full of chaos will also be bad and depressing for kids. In my opinion, having children     of our own is not necessary for our happiness.