HAVING CHILDREN OR NOT?
 
Most people want to get married and have children. Perhaps they want to leave a trace or offspring after them, so that they become somehow “immortal”. And it is commonly said that children are the ultimate bliss in our lives. Although many people agree with this statement, to my mind, it is not true.
 
Firstly, it is always claimed that having children brings happiness and meaning to one’s life. To raise them well becomes an ideal for parents. However, I think that although this may be true, children are also a financial and psychological burden for parents. To have children is to have responsibility. Parents spend all their time and money on their children, for their education, clothing and other needs, and do not have much time or money left for themselves.
 
Secondly, many people assert that it is in human nature to procreate and to see a part of them continue to live. However, I do not believe that it is necessarily instinctive. There are a lot of people who do not have any children and they do not have a tendency to see a part of them continue to live. I think having children for this reason is very old-fashioned. We can have other accomplishments in life for our name or fame continue.
 
Finally, it is commonly stated that children are our insurance for our old age and that when we get older they will take care of us. Although there are many people who think so, I believe that they are no guarantee against loneliness in old age. Usually children, whether they are married or not, leave their homes. Besides, it is very selfish to have children for insurance. If you have a child, you have to accept the fact that he/she is also an individual and has his/her own needs, and will eventually have his/her own life separate from yours.
 
To sum up, for most people it might be the biggest happiness to have children. However, I firmly believe that to have children is not everything in life. People can also live full and accomplished lives without children.