 CHILDREN
 
“It is the highest and the holiest emotion to experience motherhood or fatherhood. Everybody has a child in his own image.” All of these are vain words and pink dreams. Having children is not as easy as those cliché words or beliefs. Therefore, people should not have children.
 
First of all, people cannot predict their own future or know what will happen tomorrow. The world is full of disasters such as wars, pollution, famine, drought, starvation, natural disasters and diseases. For example, count to 3. 1,2,3: now almost 2.5 children are born and 3 children died because of starvation in Africa. Of course, nobody wants to have children in these conditions. We have to live in this dirty world but why do we make our children live in there too? So it is just a big mistake to have children.
 
Further more, it is a very heavy psychological and physical burden to have children. A mother carries her baby in her womb for nine months and 10 days and then the baby torments her during and after the birth. There is no peace, no silence or no sleep at home. On the other hand, the father has to work hard and earn more money because the baby comes with his expenses, not his “rizk.” Also the baby limits his parents’ achievements; they cannot go everywhere they want to or do the things they wish to. A baby requires more responsibility because parents should give him a good life. If they don't, they have account for every problem he has.
 
It is claimed that people should have children so that they will not be lonely when they are old. Their children will take care of them and they will feel safe. A child is the only person whom you can trust and with whom share every secret. These are big lies too. People believe in these lies and deceive themselves. They console themselves because they want to diminish the pains, regrets and torments that children give them. It is much better not to have any children than try to deceive oneself and avoid seeing the truth of having children who cause one a lot of pain and suffering.
 
To sum up, having children is a decision that has no going back. We know the difficulties the world has in store for us and we also know that children present a psychological and physical burden to their parents. Knowing these, it is very selfish to have children.