CHILDREN
 
The population of the world is getting bigger and bigger due to the need of people to have babies. Most people want to have babies, they even worry about whether they will be able to have any children, but it is interesting that some of them do not like to have children.  Although a minority of people see children as a burden financially and psychologically, and do not want to bring children to a world full of uncertainty, danger and chaos, having children brings happiness and meaning to one’s life and it is in human nature to procreate.
 
To begin with, we cannot deny that children bring happiness and meaning to our lives. Maybe we cannot know this before we have children, but all the same, we hear about that happiness from our parents. I think having a baby is similar to having an aim in our lives. Most of us have targets in life such as graduating from university, doing a master’s or doing academic career because reaching these targets will satisfy ourselves and living will be more meaningful. Raising a child can be an aim like these, because bringing up a human being from our own blood and flesh, and sacrificing our own will and desires for his good will be more satisfactory than anything. Thus, it is impossible to see our child as a financial and psychological burden since we do not think he is different from us. On the contrary, we would have fun giving him everything he needs.
 
Secondly, it is instinctive to procreate, forming a new living being from our own genes. It is in human nature and we cannot prevent the urge to have a baby because it is in our hormonal system and nature. Some people assert that it is selfish to bring children to a world full of uncertainty, danger and chaos but this world is created for humans to live and we have to procreate, continue our daily lives. The real selfishness is getting afraid of losing our comfort for having a baby.
 
Taking everything into account, having a baby must be enjoyable and must bring happiness to our lives although we have to sacrifice from ourselves. They will be a part of our bodies and we will not regret bringing them to this world.